Hello again! In this video, we are going to talk about thread pools.
The motivation for using a thread pool is that creating a thread has a lot of overhead.
The program has to create an execution stack for the thread.
It has to call an API function to get to the operating system.
The operating system has to create the data that it uses internally for managing the thread.
Then the scheduler has to execute the thread
and then a context switch will occur to actually run the
thread.
The upshot of all this is that if we create a new thread to run a function instead of calling it directly,
it can easily take 10,000 times as many instructions to execute the function in the thread.
If we create a new thread every time we start a function, then that represents an awful lot of overhead.
So is there any way we can avoid that overhead, or at least reduce it?
The concept of a thread pool comes from the typing pool.
If we go back to - say - the 1950s when there were no computers in offices.
People did not send emails,
they sent letters and memos on paper, and these had to be typed out by someone.
If you were an executive, you would have a secretary who would type out your letters and deal with all
your admin.
If you were at a less exalted level, then you would have to send your letter to the typing pool.
The
typing pool that was a room full of typists who spent all day typing out other people's letters.
When you sent your work to the typing pool, it was put in a pile of pending work
and then when a typist
became available, they would take the first item from the top of the pile and work on it.
So in that way, all the typists were kept busy.
Every time they finished one letter, they took another one and started working on that.
To implement a thread pool, we need two things.
The first one is a fixed size container of thread objects, which are all ready to run.
Usually, you would want to make this equal to the number of cores on the machine.
Presumably, we are using threads because we want to get the maximum performance from the hardware.
And if we have one thread for every processor, then all the processors on the machine are going to
be busy and we are going to get the maximum possible output.
If we have more threads than there are cores,
then we are going to get task switching and context switching, which are going to slow things down.
The C++ library provides a function which allows you to find this out. It is in the std::thread namespace and it is
called hardware underscore concurrency.
If you call this, it will return the number of cores on the machine
and that will tell you what
size to make your container of threads.
The other thing we need is a queue of task function objects.
So when users want to send a task to the thread pool, they will push it onto the queue.
Then the next thread object which becomes free, will pop
that task from the queue and execute it.
And then when it finishes that task, it will pop the next task off the front of the queue and so on.
The advantages of a thread pool are that it makes scaling very easy.
If you run your program on a different machine, which has more cores, then the thread pool will automatically
make use of all the available processor cores.
It also makes very efficient use of resources.
Threads are always busy.
The only time that threads are idle is if there is no work to do. Otherwise
they are constantly pulling tasks off the queue and executing them.
And we have one thread for every core.
So if the threads are busy all the time, then all the processor cores are going to be busy as
well.
And we are making the best use of the hardware.
Thread pools are ideally suited for short and simple tasks, which really do one thing.
In that case, the execution time for the function is going to be much smaller than the overhead
of creating a new thread.
So if you can reuse an existing thread, then you have saved a lot of time.
They are also best suited to tasks which do not block. If the task needs to perform input/output
or wait for another thread or lock a mutex, then that represents idle time when the processor is not
being fully used.
And it may be that the delay from blocking is considerably greater than the time saved by not starting
a new thread.
The biggest disadvantage to the thread pool is that the queue can affect performance. Adding and removing
task functions from the queue must be done in a safe way.
So that is going to add overhead.
And the queue can also become a bottleneck if tasks are being added to the queue faster than the threads can
remove them. In a full thread pool implementation,
you need to be very careful about how you write the queue.
In the next video, we are going to write a simple thread pool, but until then, keep coding!